so here we are for the long promised
explanation of how the Multiverse is
testable now in previous episodes I have
actually explained certain ways in which
the Multiverse is experimentally
testable but today I'm finally going to
get to David Deutsch's own experimental
test of the Multiverse interpretation
versus all those other kinds of
interpretations of quantum theory namely
the ones that involve so-called collapse
of the wave function so collapse models
now the way in which I'm going to
explain this experiment is not by simply
reading David's papers that he's written
on this or even going to some other
popular accounts of it but rather I'm
going to try and turn it into a story
and the reason for doing it this way a
reason for telling a story the story of
the experiment is the experiment isn't
practically feasible right now but it
will be one day so it's kind of like how
the Higgs boson this particle that gives
other part articles Mass was postulated
long before there was an actual
practical way of testing it took the
Large Hadron Collider you know a piece
of scientific apparatus much larger than
anything else that had gone before it
took decades before the hypothesis of
the Higgs boson could be tested by
experiment or rather before the theory
of the Higgs boson could be tested by
experiment namely the Large Hadron
Collider smashing particles together and
seeing what came out and seeing if we
could actually observe the Higgs boson
of course as purpureans what we say is
that we weren't confirming the existence
of the Higgs boson we're refuting all
the other ideas about what those
observations could mean namely if the
Higgs boson was some other kind of
particle so every other theory about
what was going on in those experiments
was refuted but the Higgs boson
explanation of the observations was not
refuted and so therefore we say that
those experiments from the Large Hadron
Collider did indeed reveal the existence
of the Higgs boson alright so now it's
story time this is a science fiction
historians so perhaps sit back get
yourself a nice cup of tea
and enjoy being transported to the
Future so picture it it's the year 2075
and though quantum computers are now
carried in the pockets of most people
David Deutsch's proposed test of
everettian quantum theory against other
so-called collapse models has yet to be
performed many artificial general
intelligences actually now populate the
Earth and while many silicons as the new
general intelligences are happy to be
called choose to house their minds
within bodies that closely resemble
those of typical humans others choose to
take the form of cars or aircraft some
few even choose bodies that double as
space-faring Vehicles because without
the need for oxygen or indeed air of any
kind they can routinely explore the
darker reaches of the solar system just
for fun some of these intelligent
spacecraft are very large indeed as they
may carry huge payloads of batteries and
some also choose to be employed as cargo
vessels shipping resources between Earth
and other bodies in the solar system now
one of these space silicons and the hero
of our story is called Pollock's cubite
parlox has what in the year 2020 would
be regarded as a very unusual body for a
person he has the shape of a very long
about a hundred meters and very wide say
about 50 meters box which is not very
deep it's only about five meters deep so
this is his body his body is a box this
is useful for carrying cargo only a
small portion of his body houses
batteries and a landing gear and rocket
fuel for landing and takeoff Pollocks
can land in any number of configurations
and generally takes off in such a way as
to minimize his cross-sectional area and
reduce air resistance on low gravity
moons he's an Explorer of this Parallax
he likes to move between places in the
solar system that no one else has been
to before and so this is why he's chosen
the body that he has now on a particular
day somewhere in 2075 parlox is
traveling from Earth to Jupiter's moon
Europa it has long been known that the
radiation saturated adding the surface
of Europa from Jupiter is too intense
for any regular human to endure so
despite many probes over the years
visiting the moon few people and no
manned missions have ever landed there
palox is a physical chemist by training
and wants to investigate the ocean
beneath the ice on the surface for signs
of life so far no other missions have
found any evidence at all the journey to
Europa is two months long and though he
could enter a kind of hibernation State
most silicons are found for reasons yet
to be known that the hibernation State
tends to cause uncomfortable nightmares
about three days in and terrible
dizziness upon waking for this reason on
Long Journeys like this Pollock chooses
the best known sleep awake sleep awake
cycle sleep seven hours wake seven hours
sleep nine hours wake nine hours repeat
he also has a list of tasks he set
himself to keep himself occupied one
item on the list that he's particularly
excited about refers to a message in his
ongoing correspondence with the now 122
year old professor David Deutsch
Pollocks asked whether he might be able
to conduct an adapted version of
deutsche's test set out in Section 8 of
his 1985 paper quantum theory as a
universal physical Theory as published
in the international Journal of
theoretical physics volume 24 David and
Pollock's plan to co-author the paper in
which the results will be published and
finally perhaps putting to rest what
they regard as almost 150 years worth of
nonsense in the foundations of quantum
theory Pollock's huge body is right now
empty and an almost perfect vacuum
isolated from any other matter as it
travels through the emptiness of space
but inside his cavernous body is one of
the most perfect Mark Zender
interferometers ever to have been
created the half silvered mirrors near
perfect the laser perfectly able to
attenuate the beam down to just one
Photon each microsecond second second or
even hour if you like the detectors the
most sensitive ever created there are
two regular mirrors in the experiment
regularly except for one thing these
mirrors are directly wired to parlox's
mind so I'll just say that again
these mirrors that are inside parlox's
body are directly wired to his mind much
like the retinas in our eye are directly
wired via the optic nerve to our brains
and our minds so parlocks has a very
special sense organ Pollocks can detect
the slightest vibration of these mirrors
due to a collision with something as
small as a single Photon Pollux has a
mind running on a brain with switching
speeds as fast as the speed of light as
all AGI in the year 2075 do and so he is
able to record and transmit data at this
speed now I've got a schematic here a
picture of the internal workings of
parlox's sense organ that is the mirror
setup as we can see the inner workings
of this particular organ if you like in
parlox's brain are very similar to The
Mark Zender interferometer so we've got
some source of photons the half silvered
mirror where the beam will be split into
an up part and a down part that's the U
and the D the regular mirror there is
parloxacinth organ it connects that
regular mirror via some cable some wire
some nerve off to parlox's mind a
similar thing with the other regular
mirror that is on the down part and then
as usual in the marks and the
interferometer we've got a couple of
detectors there detectors one and two
now parlox has carefully set up the
lengths of the U the up path and the D
down path according to collapse theories
like the Copenhagen interpretation
indeed according to any interpretation
that is not literal quantum theory
saying all possibilities really do exist
namely a Multiverse when a photon is
emitted at the source it makes no real
sense to ask which of the paths the
photon takes it simply has a 50 chance
of going along the U path and a 50
chance of going along the D path if no
one observes which of these parts it
goes along then the photon will be
detected with 100 probability at
detector one and zero percent
probability at detector 2. this is
because of how parlox has set up the
experiment namely by ensuring that the
path length of U and D is slightly
different but the details do not matter
and I've mentioned this in an earlier
episode as well about the details of how
the mark Zenda interferometer Works what
the collapse interpretation says as do
other interpretations is that some sort
of interference effect has happened and
that when the photon is finally detected
at detector 1 all the possibilities have
collapsed into one but what the collapse
Theory also says is that if anyone were
to observe the photon mid-flight for
example if they knew it was traveling
along the D path and not the u-path then
the interference effect would be
destroyed and we would have 50 of the
photons going to detect a one and 50 to
detect the two in other words there is a
special kind of physics of observation
in quantum theory observation has a
special effect in the world so this is
on the Copenhagen or any so-called
collapse Theory observation has a
special role in the world it has special
physics anyone who says that the wave
function collapses or wonders about what
happens during collapse or why it
collapses and so on these people believe
in alternatives to the Multiverse but on
the other hand proponents of the Everett
way of understanding quantum theory the
realistic way of understanding
quantitative the literal reading of the
equations of quantum theory is to say
that no such collapse happens
observation has no special role
observation does not cause the collapse
of the wave function there is nothing
special about observations on this view
the so-called measurement problem is
it's sometimes called is solved it
dissolves Away by saying there is no
special physics of measurement so when
it comes to the inner workings of
Pollock's brain his sense organs going
on here the Everett understanding of
this is that both possibilities happen
both the up and the down paths are
followed and this in fact explains why
interference effects occur the photon is
in fact a multiversal object when the
photon encounters the half silver mirror
all the universes in which the
experiment occurs differentiate into two
groups one in which the photon takes the
U path and another group in which the
photon takes the d-path this is the only
difference between the two groups of
universes these two universes then
recombine at the second half silvered
mirror just prior to the detectors and
it is the lick true collision between
these two photons the photons at the U
and the D path that cause the new
recombined Photon to set off the
detector at detector 1 but not detector
2. now the key thing here for the year
2075 and for power locks and what we're
now able to do in the distant future is
that parlocks is in fact able to sense
the Collision of a photon at either of
the regular mirrors because he has a
sense organ so he is able to observe
interference going on prior to it
happening so parlocks's sense organs are
part of the experiment his sense organs
are those mirrors those regular mirrors
he can detect if photons are striking
those mirrors and so he is an observer
of the experiment while it's going on
here the two impossible to do because we
humans don't have such sense organs but
an artificial general intelligence of
the future could have such a sense organ
could build themselves such a sense of
them and perform this experiment
according to the collapse interpretation
this should cause the interference
effect to be lost because it has been
observed according to those
interpretations I all other
interpretations besides the Multiverse
observation plays a key role in physics
it causes the collapse of the wave
function at least it is supposed to so
in this view if we repeat the experiment
we should see half the photons to be
detected at one and half for two no
matter what if parlox is sensing that is
to say observing them with this sense
organs to regular mirrors and if indeed
the interference fails to occur during
this observation experiment during this
interference experiment and Pollux is
observing it then we have refuted the
Multiverse Theory this is the sense in
which the Multiverse is testable we can
refute we can test we experimentally
test and falsify the Multiverse theory
of course we have no real alternative
but according to the Multiverse account
of things no collapse happens so long as
parlocks keeps the information about
which mirror he has detected a collision
to himself here's what goes on according
to literal quantum theory I according to
the Multiverse the photon at the first
half silvered mirror causes the
differentiation of the universe into two
groups in half the universes the photon
travels the d-path and parlocks in the D
Universe detects the collision with the
photon in the other half of the
universes parlox detects the photons
having traveled the U path palux himself
actually splits into two separate
versions in either case parlox U or
parlox D in whichever Universe he can
record and transmit back to David an
intermediate result and say I can
testify that I have observed a photon
traveling along One and Only One path it
must be the same message in either case
now the distances D and U are long and
it takes light some time to Traverse
this path so parlocks does indeed have
time to do all this because he's got a
fast brain remember but very soon after
he sends that message the message that
says I have detected the photon striking
one of my mirrors and only one of my
mirrors he then sends another message
and he repeats the experiment again and
again as good scientists do Sending
message after message back to David
who's part of the experiment if the
messages went something like this I have
detected the photon at one and only one
mirror
then the next message comes I have
detected the photon at detector 2 and
then I have detected the photon one and
only one mirror
I have detected the photon at detector
one I have detected the photon at one
and only one mirror I have detected the
photon is detector too and so on in
other words roughly half the time
detector 1 is activated and half the
time detector 2 is because the photon
only ever takes one path either the U or
the D path it does not take both parts
simultaneously if this was to happen if
this was to happen the Multiverse is
refuted however if the message was to
run this way I have detected the photon
at one and only one mirror
time delay I've detected the photon that
detector too
and then I have to take the photon at
one and only one mirror time delay I
have detected the photon at detected two
Etc it keeps on detecting it a detector
too then interference has happened
despite the fact the photon was observed
at only ever one of the mirrors what
this means is that the act of observing
the photon has not collapsed to the wave
function and though the photon was
detected at only one mirror something
traveled along the other path in Another
Universe shoving aside the photon each
time and this Collision forced the
recombined photon to travel always into
detector 2. now it's crucially important
that parlox tells no one which mirror he
observed the photon strike because this
ruins the experiment it ruins the
experiment because once he says I detect
the photon having struck only one mirror
and that is the mirror corresponding to
the U path this means that the Universe
have differentiated still further and
cannot come together again to interfere
they cannot become fungible once more
the interference can happen if and only
if the only thing that is different
between them is the path of this single
Photon if other things start to change
like for example Pollock sends David a
message that the d-path was the one
travel then David also knows in which
Universe he and Pollocks are in and that
is a difference in that Universe outside
the experiment this is called
decoherence by the way D coherence is
where information is leaked out of the
experiment into the world
differentiating the universes moreover
the message itself will carry different
information in the two universes making
them quite different and increasingly
different as the energy of the message
as it goes as it travels back to the
Earth collides with objects in the solar
system we need to keep the differences
only and exclusively inside of parlox's
mind and effectively this entire
apparatus is in parlox's mind or brain
shielded as it were from the rest of
physical reality this might seem awfully
contrived this might seem bizarre what
on Earth are we doing in the year 2075
why do I have artificial general
intelligence don't blame the Multiverse
Theory this bizarre way of testing the
multi verse is not the fault of the
Multiverse Theory it's the fault of the
so-called mainstream Copenhagen
interpretations or any of the collapse
models they're the weird theory that
requires a weird test to refute that's
all it is those theories that says there
is a special role for observers and so
we need to be able to test this special
role of observers it is observers on
that account on that Copenhagen account
on the collapse models account it is
those theories that say there is a
special role for observers
that special role is that The Observers
collapse the wave function that's what
all other interpretations say that is
the spooky and strange claim so to rule
that out that's why we need this
elaborate method inside of a mind to
test the claim that observers or minds
or something like that is causing the
collapse The Vanishing of all the
possibilities except for one if we can
rule out this single Universe model by
having interfere between two universes
occur within a single mind then we
refute the Observer dependence of
quantum theory with the many worlds idea
of effort and more precisely Deutsch who
replaced the concept that Everett had of
branching of a small number of universes
into a larger and larger number and
instead David said well that's not quite
right it's not that we start off with a
small number and that number gets
greater and greater and greater over
time as Quantum phenomena occur but
rather he said that the number of
universes that exists all the way back
to the beginning of time are constant in
number and began fungible but then
differentiate when the possibilities
arise we conclude that the single
universe theory and collapse models can
be refuted by this means the only known
explanation is that the Multiverse did
split or differentiate into two
different groups A u-group and A D group
and these universes then interfered with
each other in such a way that the photon
is only ever detected at detector 2 and
never at detector one despite the fact
it was observed by parlocks at only one
of the two mirrors and this was possible
because Pollock really did split into
two versions of himself different only
to the extent of observing a single
Photon along the D path or along the
u-path now what this might be like to
split into two copies that are no longer
fungible and then to come back together
to have these kind of sense organs is
anyone's guess at all but I guess he was
having fun after all he did know that he
was going to be authoring a co-authoring
a paper with David Deutsch about the
fundamentals of physics so that that
must have been pretty exciting once the
experiment is over it makes no sense to
ask parlox which mirror did you actually
detect the photon at was it
the mirror at the on the D path or the
mirror along the u-path Pollux won't be
able to say because the two versions of
parlogs and indeed the whole two groups
of universes have recombined at the
second half silver mirror Pollock simply
cannot remember because he split into
two different copies one of whom
experienced you and one of whom
experienced D but he only recalls ever
having experienced one
this is where language kind of breaks
down he both experienced both and won
simultaneously very strange
so language somewhat fails to capture
what is going on here but the truth is
he was both copies for a very brief
amount of time and again whether this
felt like something special or nothing
particularly special we may be able to
interrogate him about that but he'll
never be able to tell us
which mirror he detected the photon at
once he becomes fungible again once the
two versions of him combined together to
become a single version of Pollocks once
more so he will in fact be the first
Earthling ever to have experienced this
sensation of knowing he was in two
universes at the same time and then
becoming one version of himself in one
Universe again now that's if it all
works out as predicted by the Multiverse
but what if he does not have this
experience of being in and conscious of
two different non-fungible universes
simultaneously well then the whole
experiment would refute the Multiverse
because observation apparently would
collapse the wave function or better to
say the Multiverse itself is simply
refuted the point is if the experiment
works as predicted there is no way of
explaining any of it by recourse to a
collapse model where all the universes
but one cease to exist so if indeed the
interference fails to happen as
predicted then parlock's experiment
David Deutsch's experiment has roundly
refuted the Multiverse quantum theory
would then have a hugely open problem
about how observation works and why it
is so fundamental to the nature of the
universe we would need to develop a new
physics of observation and measurement
and physics would become in part
fundamental physics would become in part
about us about people and how it is that
our choice to observe stuff or not can
cause the majority of reality to to
vanish in an act of performing a
scientific experiment when we choose to
perform a particular experiment we're
causing the collapse of the wave
function the collapse of all these other
realities that come to Bear causing the
result of the experiment to be the way
it is whereas the Multiverse just says
all those realities really do continue
to exist whatever the case the
Multiverse is eminently testable by this
technique and in principle falsifiable
so that's that after many months of
promise I hope this satisfies some of
you on the most contentious point when
it comes to the Multiverse well perhaps
not the most contentious point one of
the most contentious points namely the
Multiverse is a testable Theory from a
number of different angles there are
experiments possible and the strange
experiment here again is not the fault
of the Multiverse it's the fault of the
collapse models to propose observation
is a fundamental thing that affects
reality so we need an experiment that
could possibly refute this idea and
David's version of this is different to
the one that I've just told mine is
based entirely on his of course errors
are completely mine but I thought that
because we'd already explained the Mark
zende interferometer I wanted to explain
that way of doing this experiment now
the way that David does it is via
looking at this thing called the stern
goulash experiment and a property of
subatomic particles called spin and so
rather than attempting to explain all of
that I've stuck with what I hope we're
already familiar with if you've been
bearing with me through this Multiverse
series and on that this video doesn't
quite finish the Multiverse series but
for now it does I have a couple more
things to say about the Multiverse us
but we're going to save those for a more
distant episode for now I wish to move
on to the next chapter chapter 12 a
physicists history of philosophy and
that should be a lot of fun because
bazaaras some of the things that we've
been talking about during this series
have been I like the claim for example
that your observation can cause vast
parts of physical reality to cease to
exist the reason why people including
very smart people very smart physicists
might come to endorse or insist on such
ideas or do very bizarre things like
reject the Multiverse it's not because
of the science but it's because of their
philosophy bad philosophy
and an overview of bad Philosophy by
David Deutsch's just the remedy for
undoing poor thinking on this point and
it will help us to understand why
quantum theory in particular in
particular has a special place in the
hearts of many many philosophers because
of this bad philosophy so the scientific
Community has has sort of treated
quantum theory in a way that's somewhat
different to the way it treats any other
scientific theory but we'll get on to
that we'll get on to why bad philosophy
has come to taint our understanding of
quantum theory and hampered progress in
quantum theory next time until then
bye-bye
foreign
[Music]
[Applause]